# G10 - A Virtual CPU

The **G10** is a custom virtual CPU inspired by the CPUs that powered popular retro 
video game consoles, complete with an assembler and linker. Written in C++ with 
the C++23 standard.

## Folder Structure

This workspace is organized into the following folder structure:

- `docs/` - Contains specification documents for the G10 and tools.
- `examples/` - Contains example projects written in the G10 assembly language.
- `projects/` - Contains the source code for the G10 projects.
- `scripts/` - Contains build scripts and other automation tools.
- `tools/` - Contains build tools and other utilities.
- `vendor/` - Contains some of the third-party dependencies which will be needed
    to build this workspace's projects.

## Specifications

The projects in this workspace were written according to the following
specification documents, with varying degrees of deviation:

- [G10 CPU Specification](./docs/G10.CPU.Specification.md)
- [G10 Assembly Language and Assembler Specification](./docs/G10.ASM.Specification.md)
- [G10 Object File Format Specification](./docs/G10.OBJ.Specification.md)
- [G10 Executable File Format Specification](./docs/G10.EXE.Specification.md)
- [G10 GB Specification](./docs/G10.Boy.Specification.md)

## Dependencies

The following dependencies are necessary to build the projects in this
workspace:

- A C++ compiler capable of supporting at least the C++23 language standard.
    - G++ version 15.2 was used to develop this project.
- [Premake5](https://premake.github.io/)
- [SDL3](https://www.libsdl.org/)
- [Dear ImGui (Docking Branch)](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui/tree/docking)
    - With the `SDL3` and `SDLRenderer3` backends.
- [Portable File Dialogs (PFD)](https://github.com/samhocevar/portable-file-dialogs)

The **Dear ImGui** and **PFD** dependencies are provided in the `vendor/`
directory. The **Premake5** dependency is provided in the `tools/` folder. You
will need to provide the **SDL3** dependency.

## Building

To build the projects in this workspace...

- **On Linux**: 
    - Run the `scripts/full-build.sh` script to perform a clean build, which will 
        also build the example projects in the `examples/` folder.
    - Run the `scripts/gen.sh` script to generate the build files using Premake5.
        - Arguments passed into this script will be forwarded into Premake.
    - Run the `scripts/build.sh` script to build the projects generated by 
        `scripts/gen.sh`.
        - Arguments passed into this script will be forwarded into the
            configured build tool (default: `make`).
    - Run the `scripts/asm.sh` script to assemble and link G10 assembly code.
        - Pass in a folder containing the G10 assembly source code to build.
    - Run the `scripts/clean.sh` script to clean the build artifacts.

## Projects

The following projects are included in this workspace:

- **G10 CPU** (`projects/G10.CPU.*`)
    - Library implementing the G10 CPU's emulation.
- **G10 ASM** (`projects/G10.ASM.*`)
    - Library implementing the G10 assembler and linker.
- **G10 ASM Tool** (`projects/G10.ASMTool.*`)
    - Command-line tool for assembling and linking G10 assembly code.
- **G10 Testbed** (`projects/G10.Testbed.*`)
    - A testbed emulator application used for testing the G10 CPU and ASM libraries.
- **G10 GB** (`projects/G10.GB.*`)
    - Library implementing a G10-powered virtual hardware platform based on the
        Game Boy and Game Boy Color.
- **G10 Boy** (`projects/G10.Boy.*`)
    - A frontend application for the **G10 GB** virtual hardware platform.
