# Specification: G10 CPU

Below is a specification for a custom, virtual CPU architecture, named the "G10".
This document outlines the architecture's features, instruction set, and 
operational details.

## Overview

The G10 CPU is a CISC architecture designed for educational purposes, featuring
a straightforward, fixed-length instruction set and a simple memory model, and
drawing inspiration from classic 8-bit CPU designs (namely, those of the Intel
8080, Zilog Z80, MOS 6502, and the Nintendo Game Boy's Sharp LR35902). Effectively, 
this is basically those architectures reimagined with 32-bit registers and a 
32-bit address space.

The G10 CPU is intended to be a virtual CPU architecture, meaning that it is
designed to be implemented in software, rather than as a physical hardware
component. This allows for greater flexibility and ease of use, as well as
simplifying the process of development and testing. If you (the reader) are
interested in implementing the G10 CPU in hardware, however, feel absolutely free
to do so!

### Details

- **Data Width**: 32 bits
    - Supports 8-bit, 16-bit, and 32-bit data types
- **Address Bus**: 32 bits
    - Supports up to 4 GB of addressable memory
- **Endianness**:
    - Instruction opcodes: Big-endian (most significant byte first)
    - Everything else: Little-endian (least significant byte first)
- **Clock Speed**: Adjustable (by the virtual machine hardware)
    - Some examples of common clock speeds include the following:
        - *Nintendo Game Boy (Color)*: 4.194304 MHz / 8.388608 MHz (double speed)
        - *Intel 8080 (Standard)*: 2 MHz
        - *Zilog Z80 (Original)*: 2.5 MHz
        - *MOS 6502 (Standard)*: 1 MHz
        - *Ricoh 2A03 (Nintendo Entertainment System)*: 1.79 MHz
    - The G10 CPU also supports a "double speed" mode, which can be toggled
        by the virtual machine hardware as needed for performance or power.
        For example, just double the above-listed clock speeds when in double
        speed mode.
- **Instruction Set Architecture (ISA)**: CISC (Complex Instruction Set Computer)
- **Instruction Opcode Length**: 16 bits (2 bytes)

## Memory Layout

The G10 CPU features a flat memory model with a 32-bit address space, which
allows for direct addressing of up to 4 GB of memory. The G10 itself assumes
a very broad memory layout, leaving specific memory mapping details to the
virtual machine hardware powered by the G10 CPU, but does define the following
memory regions, on top of which the VM may build its own memory map:

- **$00000000 - $00000FFF**: Program Metadata
    - This region is reserved for storing useful information about the program,
        such as its entry point, stack pointer initialization value, and other
        metadata (like name, version, author, etc).
- **$00001000 - $00001FFF**: Interrupt Service Routines
    - This region is reserved for the interrupt service routines, which
        reserves space for up to 32 interrupt service routines, each taking
        `0x80` (128) bytes of space.
- **$00002000 - $7FFFFFFF**: Read-Only Memory (ROM)
    - This region is intended for program code and read-only data.
- **$80000000 - $FFFFFFFF**: Read/Write Memory (RAM)
    - This region is intended for writable data, including the stack.

The general rule of thumb is that any address where bit 31 (the highest bit) is
clear (`$00000000` to `$7FFFFFFF`) is considered read-only memory, while any
address where bit 31 is set (`$80000000` to `$FFFFFFFF`) is considered
read/write memory. All memory is executable, provided that read access is allowed
by the virtual hardware.

### Quick RAM and I/O Ports

Although it is not defined in the G10's broad memory layout, certain instructions
allow for quickly moving data to and from memory at relative 16-bit and 8-bit
addresses. These addresses are relative to addresses `$FFFF0000` and `$FFFFFF00`,
respectively, effectively providing a small "quick RAM" area of 64 KB, and a
smaller "I/O port" region of 256 bytes, for fast access to frequently-used
data.

### Memory Management

The G10 CPU itself does not include any built-in memory or memory management
capabilities. Instead, it relies on the virtual machine hardware to provide the
bus interface for memory access and I/O ports, and to enforce any access control
or memory mapping as needed. The CPU simply issues read and write requests to
the virtual hardware, which then handles the actual memory access and returns
data to the CPU as needed.

## Register File

The G10 CPU contains a built-in register file, which consists of sixteen
general-purpose registers, each 32 bits wide, and several special-purpose
registers used for specific functions within the CPU.

### General-Purpose Registers

The general-purpose registers in the G10 CPU's register file can either be
accessed as full 32-bit registers, or as smaller 16-bit or 8-bit registers,
depending on the needs of the instruction being executed. The registers are
named as follows:

- **32-bit Registers**: `D0` to `D15`
- **16-bit Registers**: `W0` to `W15`
    - `Wn` corresponds to the lower 16 bits of `Dn` (e.g., `W0` is bits 0-15 of
        `D0`)
- **8-bit Registers**: `H0` to `H15` (high byte), `L0` to `L15` (low byte)
    - `Hn` corresponds to bits 8-15 of `Dn`
    - `Ln` corresponds to bits 0-7 of `Dn`

#### Accumulator Registers

Registers `D0`, `W0` and `L0` are collectively referred to as the "accumulator"
registers, and are used by certain instructions that specifically operate on the
accumulator. These instructions include arithmetic and logical operations, as
well as certain CPU control instructions.

### Special-Purpose Registers

The special-purpose registers in the G10 CPU's register file play specific roles
in indicating the state of the CPU and controlling its operation. These registers
are as follows:

- **Program Counter (PC)**: A 32-bit register that holds the address of the next
    instruction or immediate data to be fetched from memory.
- **Stack Pointer (SP)**: A 32-bit register that points to the top of the stack
    in the read/write memory region.
    - The stack grows downwards, meaning that pushing data onto the
        stack decrements the SP, while popping data from the stack increments it.
    - The initial value of the SP is typically set to the highest address of the
        read/write memory region (`$FFFFFEFF`), but this can be adjusted as
        needed by the program.
    - Bit 31 of the SP is always set to `1`, ensuring that the stack always
        resides in the read/write memory region.
- **Flags Register (FR)**: An 8-bit register that contains various flags which
    indicate the current state of the CPU. The bits are laid out as follows:

    3. **Overflow Flag (V)**: Indicates whether the last arithmetic operation resulted
        in a signed overflow.
        - For addition operations, this flag is set if the signs of the two operands
            were the same, but the sign of the result is different (e.g. adding two
            positive numbers yields a negative result, adding two negative numbers
            yields a positive result).
        - For subtraction operations, this flag is set if the signs of the two operands
            were different, and the sign of the result is different from the sign
            of the first operand (e.g. subtracting a negative number from a positive
            number yields a negative result, subtracting a positive number from
            a negative number yields a positive result).
    4. **Carry Flag (C)**: Indicates whether the last arithmetic or logical
        operation resulted in a carry out, or a borrow into, the most significant
        bit.
        - For 8-bit operations, this flag is set `(result > 0xFF)` or 
            `(result < 0x00)`.
        - For 16-bit operations, this flag is set `(result > 0xFFFF)` or 
            `(result < 0x0000)`.
        - For 32-bit operations, this flag is set `(result > 0xFFFFFFFF)` or 
            `(result < 0x00000000)`.
        - This flag is used as a conditional check for branching instructions.
    5. **Half-Carry Flag (H)**: Indicates whether the last arithmetic operation
        resulted in a carry out, or a borrow into, a certain bit position.
        - For 8-bit operations, this flag is set if `(result & 0xF) > 0xF` or
            `(result < 0x0)`.
        - For 16-bit operations, this flag is set if `(result & 0xFFF) > 0xFFF` or
            `(result < 0x0)`.
        - For 32-bit operations, this flag is set if 
            `(result & 0xFFFFFFF) > 0xFFFFFFF` or `(result < 0x0)`.
        - This flag is primarily used for BCD (Binary-Coded Decimal) arithmetic.
    6. **Negative (Subtract) Flag (N)**: Indicates whether the last arithmetic
        operation was a subtraction.
        - This flag is set if the last arithmetic operation was a subtraction,
            and cleared if it was an addition.
        - This flag is primarily used for BCD (Binary-Coded Decimal) arithmetic.
    7. **Zero Flag (Z)**: Indicates whether the result of the last arithmetic
        or logical operation was zero.
        - This flag is set if the result is zero, and cleared otherwise.
        - This flag is used as a conditional check for branching instructions.

- **Instruction Register (INST)**: A 16-bit register that holds the opcode of
    the instruction which was last fetched from memory. This register is used
    internally by the CPU to decode and execute instructions, and is not directly
    accessible by programs.
- **Instruction Pointer (INSP)**: A 32-bit register which holds the address of the
    current instruction being executed. This register is primarily used for
    debugging and exception handling purposes, as it allows the CPU to keep
    track of the instruction that caused an exception or interrupt.
- **Immediate Data Register (IMMD)**: A 32-bit register that holds the last
    fetched immediate data from memory. This register is used internally by the
    CPU to execute instructions that require immediate data, and is not directly
    accessible by programs.
- **Immediate Pointer (IMMP)**: A 32-bit register which holds the address of the
    current instruction's immediate data being fetched from memory. This register
    is primarily used for debugging and exception handling purposes, as it allows
    the CPU to keep track of the immediate data associated with the instruction
    that caused an exception or interrupt.
- **Stop Flag**: This flag register indicates that the CPU is in an 
    ultra-low-power `STOP` state.
    - If this flag is set, the CPU's clock is disabled entirely, halting all
        operations (instruction execution, interrupts, etc.) until the flag is 
        cleared.
    - This flag is set by executing the `STOP` instruction.
    - This flag is also set automatically if a Double Fault has occured.
        See the **Exception Code** section below for more details.
    - This flag must be cleared explicitly by the virtual machine, via some
        external event (e.g., a hardware reset or a button press).
    - If this flag was set due to a Double Fault, it can only be cleared via 
        a hardware reset.
- **Halt Flag**: This flag register indicates that the CPU is in a low-power 
    `HALT` state.
    - If this flag is set, the CPU stops executing instructions, but
        continues to respond to interrupts. Unlike the `STOP` state, the CPU's
        clock remains active while in the `HALT` state.
    - If the CPU is stepped while in the `HALT` state, it will consume one
        M-cycle, but will not execute any instructions.
    - This flag is set by executing the `HALT` instruction.
    - This flag is cleared when an enabled interrupt is pending.
- **Interrupt Master Enable Register (IME)**: This flag register controls whether 
    the CPU will respond to and service interrupts.
    - If this flag is set, the CPU will respond to and service enabled
        interrupts when they are pending.
    - If this flag is clear, the CPU will ignore all interrupts, even if they
        are enabled and pending.
    - This flag is set by executing the `EI`, `EII` or `RETI` instructions.
        - `EI` enables interrupts after the next instruction is executed.
            See the **Interrupt Master Pending Flag (IMP)** below for more details.
        - `EII` and `RETI` enable interrupts immediately.
    - This flag is cleared by executing the `DI` instruction, or when an
        interrupt is acknowledged and is about to be serviced.
    - Interrupt vector #0 (the highest-priority interrupt, used for exception
        handling) is always serviced, regardless of the state of this flag.
- **Interrupt Master Pending Register (IMP)**: This flag register indicates that 
    the IME flag is scheduled to be set after the next instruction is executed.
    - This flag is set by executing the `EI` instruction.
    - This flag is cleared after the next instruction is executed, at which
        point the IME flag is also set.
    - This flag has no effect on interrupt servicing; it simply indicates
        that the IME flag will be set soon.
- **Interrupt Enable Register (IE)**: A 32-bit register that controls which
    interrupts are enabled.
    - Each bit in this register corresponds to a specific interrupt vector.
    - If a bit is set, the corresponding interrupt is enabled; if it is clear,
        the interrupt is disabled.
    - Bit 0 of this register, which corresponds to interrupt vector #0 (the
        exception handler), is always set and cannot be cleared.
- **Interrupt Request Register (IRQ)**: A 32-bit register that indicates which
    interrupts are currently pending.
    - Each bit in this register corresponds to a specific interrupt vector.
    - If a bit is set, the corresponding interrupt is pending; if it is clear,
        the interrupt is not pending.
    - If an interrupt is both enabled (its bit in the `IE` register is set) and
        pending (its bit in the `IRQ` register is set), and the `IME` flag is also
        set, the CPU will service the interrupt.
- **Pending Exception Code Register (PEC)**: An 8-bit register which holds the code of
    an exception which was just raised. This register is used internally by the
    CPU to track exceptions that need to be handled.
- **Exception Code Register (EC)**: An 8-bit register that holds the code of an
    exception which is about to be handled.
- **Double Fault Flag**: A flag that indicates whether a Double Fault condition
    has occurred. See the **Double Faults** subsection below for more details.

## Interrupts

The G10 CPU supports a simple interrupt mechanism, allowing virtual hardware
to request the CPU's attention and temporarily halt its current execution flow
to service an interrupt. The CPU can handle up to 32 different interrupt vectors,
each corresponding to a specific interrupt source. These interrupts are
prioritized, with lower-numbered interrupt vectors having higher priority.

Interrupt checking and servicing occurs between the execution of instructions.
In a frame of execution, this is performed after the `STOP` state check and
before the fetching of the next instruction opcode. The following steps are
taken to check for and service interrupts:

1. If the `HALT` flag is set, the CPU checks for any enabled and pending
    interrupts. If such an interrupt exists, the CPU clears the `HALT` flag.
    Otherwise, if no enabled and pending interrupts exist, the CPU remains in the
    `HALT` state and does not proceed to fetch the next instruction.
2. If the `IME` flag is set, the CPU iterates through the 32 bits of the `IE` and
    `IRQ` registers, starting from bit 0 (the highest-priority interrupt vector)
    to bit 31 (the lowest-priority interrupt vector). 
    - For each bit position `i`:
        - If bit `i` in both the `IE` and `IRQ` registers is set, that interrupt is
            ready to be serviced.
        - If `i` is zero and `PEC` is non-zero, that indicates a pending exception, 
            which the CPU will acknowledge at this point, at which point interrupt
            0 is also acknowledged. See the next step.
    - If the `IME` flag is clear, or if the `IMP` flag is set, this step is
        skipped and, in the latter case, `IME` is set. The exception handler
        will still be acknowledged and serviced if an exception is pending.
3. If an interrupt is found to be ready to be serviced, then the CPU proceeds to
    acknowledge the interrupt:
    - If the exception handler interrupt (vector #0) is being acknowledged in
        response to a pending exception, that exception is also acknowledged.
        See the **Exceptions** chapter below for details.
    - The corresponding bit `i` in the `IRQ` register is cleared.
    - The `IME` flag is cleared to prevent further interrupts from being
        serviced while the current interrupt is being handled.
    - If, for some reason, the `HALT` flag is still set at this point, it is
        cleared.
    - The current value of the `PC` register is pushed onto the stack.
        - In order from highest (most significant) byte to lowest (least significant)
            byte, each byte of the `PC` is written to the memory address pointed
            to by the `SP` register, and the `SP` register is decremented
            accordingly.
    - The `PC` register is then loaded with the starting address of the interrupt
        vector subroutine, calculated as `$1000 + (i * 0x80)`, where `i` is the
        interrupt vector number.
    - This process consumes eight machine cycles: two for a wait state, four for the
        stack push operation, one for the resulting change to `SP`, and one for
        jumping the `PC` to the interrupt service routine's starting address.
    - If an exception is raised at any point during the above process, then a
        Double Fault condition has occured. See the **Exceptions** chapter for
        details.
4. The normal fetch-decode-execute instruction cycle resumes.

The G10 reserves the memory region from `$00001000` to `$00001FFF` for the
interrupt service routine table, allowing for up to 32 interrupt vector
subroutines, each taking `0x80` (128) bytes of space.

## Exceptions

The G10 CPU includes a basic exception handling mechanism to manage unexpected
conditions (usually, severe errors) that occur during program execution. If, at
any time during the operation of the CPU or its virtual hardware implementation,
an exception is raised, the CPU will record the exception code in the `PEC`
(Pending Exception Code) register.

During the CPU's normal interrupt-checking phase (between HALT-check and
instruction decoding), if the `PEC` register contains a non-zero value, the CPU
will set the `EC` register to the value of the `PEC` register, clear the `PEC` 
register, then service the exception handler interrupt at interrupt vector #0
(address `$1000`) immediately, regardless of the state of the `IME` flag, and 
the `IE` and `IRQ` registers. This ensures that exceptions are always handled
promptly and with the highest priority, even if interrupts are currently disabled.

The following exception codes are defined in the G10 CPU:

- `0x00`: **`OK`**
    - Indicates that no exception has occurred.
    - If the exception-raising mechanism is invoked with this code, no action is
        taken by the CPU.
- `0x01`: **`INVALID_INSTRUCTION`**
    - Raised when the CPU encounters an instruction opcode that is not
        recognized as a valid instruction in the G10 instruction set.
- `0x02`: **`INVALID_ARGUMENT`**
    - Raised when an instruction is executed with an argument that is not valid
        for that instruction (e.g., an invalid register, an out-of-bounds memory
        address, etc).
- `0x03`: **`INVALID_READ_ACCESS`**, **`BAD_READ_ACCESS`**
    - Raised by the virtual hardware when a read operation is attempted on a
        memory address which it does not allow reading from.
    - The normal behavior of the CPU is not to raise this exception itself, but
        rather read an open-bus value (`0xFF`) instead. This exception is intended
        to be raised by the virtual hardware if it wants to enforce stricter
        access control.
- `0x04`: **`INVALID_WRITE_ACCESS`**, **`BAD_WRITE_ACCESS`**
    - Raised by the virtual hardware when a write operation is attempted on a
        memory address which it does not allow writing to.
    - The normal behavior of the CPU is not to raise this exception itself, but
        rather ignore the write operation. This exception is intended to be 
        raised by the virtual hardware if it wants to enforce stricter access 
        control.
- `0x05`: **`INVALID_EXECUTE_ACCESS`**, **`BAD_EXECUTE_ACCESS`**
    - Raised by the CPU if attempting to fetch an instruction opcode from memory
        results in an `INVALID_READ_ACCESS` exception being raised.
- `0x06`: **`DIVIDE_BY_ZERO`**
    - Raised by the CPU if executing an instruction involves a division or modulus
        operation where the divisor is zero.
    - No such instructions are defined in the base G10 instruction set, but this
        exception is provided for potential future instructions or extensions
        that may involve division or modulus operations.
- `0x07`: **`STACK_OVERFLOW`**
    - Raised by the CPU if a stack push operation (either via the `PUSH`
        instruction or during interrupt/exception servicing) results in an
        `INVALID_WRITE_ACCESS` exception being raised (i.e., if the stack pointer
        winds up pointing to invalid or unmapped memory).
    - Also raised by the CPU if a stack push operation would cause the stack
        to shrink beyond its maximum allowed size (e.g., if the stack pointer
        would shrink down below `$80000000`).
- `0x08`: **`STACK_UNDERFLOW`**
    - Raised by the CPU if a stack pop operation (via the `POP`, `RET`, or `RETI`
        instructions) results in an `INVALID_READ_ACCESS` exception being raised
        (i.e., if the stack pointer winds up pointing to invalid or unmapped
        memory).
    - Also raised by the CPU if a stack pop operation would cause the stack
        to grow beyond its maximum allowed size (e.g., if the stack pointer would
        grow up above `$FFFFFFFF`).
- `0x09`: **`HARDWARE_ERROR`**
    - Raised by the virtual hardware to indicate that an error has occured during
        a hardware component's clocking operations.
    - This exception is intended to be raised by the virtual hardware itself,
        rather than the CPU.
- `0x0A`: **`WATCHDOG_TIMEOUT`**
- `0x0B`: **`DOUBLE_FAULT`**
    - Can be raised by the virtual hardware to force a **Double Fault** condition,
        even if no other exception is currently being handled.
    - Useful for debugging/testing purposes, or for simulating severe hardware
        failures.

When an exception is raised, the following steps are taken by the CPU:

1. The exception code is written to the `PEC` (Pending Exception Code) register.
    - If `PEC` is non-zero at this point, or if the `DOUBLE_FAULT` exception
        is raised, then a Double Fault condition has occured.
2. During the next interrupt servicing step, if `PEC` is non-zero, then the CPU
    acknowledges the exception by writing `PEC`'s value to the `EC` (Exception
    Code) register.
    - If `EC` is already non-zero at this point, then a Double Fault condition 
        has occured.
    - At this point, `PEC` is cleared.
3. At this point, the CPU acknowledges the exception handler interrupt at vector
    #0, using the steps outlined in the **Interrupts** chapter above.
    - This interrupt will be serviced regardless of the current states of the
        `IME` flag and the `IRQ` and `IE` registers.
    - The exception handler **cannot** be interrupted or preempted by other
        interrupts. The `IME` is temporarily disabled during this period.
    - The exception handler finishes, and `EC` is cleared, upon execution of the
        `RETI` instruction.

During the execution of the exception handler routine, when an `RETI` instruction
is executed, the `EC` register is cleared (set to `0x00`, indicating no exception),
and normal execution resumes from the point where the exception occurred (the
`PC` is restored from the stack).

### Double Faults

A **Double Fault** is a critical condition that arises when an exception is
raised while another exception is either pending, or is being serviced by the 
CPU. This situation indicates a severe problem, from which the CPU is not 
allowed to recover normally.

A Double Fault condition can occur in the following scenarios:

- An exception is raised while another exception is currently pending.
- An exception is raised while the CPU is acknowledging a pending interrupt.
- An exception is acknowledged during the interrupt servicing phase while
    another exception is currently being serviced.
- A `DOUBLE_FAULT` exception is explicitly raised.

When a Double Fault condition occurs, the CPU sets the `T` (Stop) register, placing 
the CPU into the `STOP` state. If the CPU is placed into the `STOP` state due to 
a Double Fault, it can only be exited via a hardware reset. This measure is taken 
to prevent further complications and to ensure that the system can be brought back 
to a known good state through an external reset.

## Hardware Registers

The G10 CPU provides a set of hardware registers which can be memory-mapped by
the virtual machine hardware. These registers include the following:

- `IE0`: Interrupt Enable Register - Byte 0
    - This register corresponds to bits 0-7 of the 32-bit `IE` register.
    - All 8 bits of this register are readable.
    - Bits 1 through 7 of this register are writable.
    - Bit 0 of this register corresponds to the exception handler interrupt
        (interrupt vector #0), and is always set to `1`. Writing to this bit has
        no effect.
- `IE1`: Interrupt Enable Register - Byte 1
    - This register corresponds to bits 8-15 of the 32-bit `IE` register.
    - All 8 bits of this register are readable and writable.
- `IE2`: Interrupt Enable Register - Byte 2
    - This register corresponds to bits 16-23 of the 32-bit `IE` register.
    - All 8 bits of this register are readable and writable.
- `IE3`: Interrupt Enable Register - Byte 3
    - This register corresponds to bits 24-31 of the 32-bit `IE` register.
    - All 8 bits of this register are readable and writable.
- `IRQ0`: Interrupt Request Register - Byte 0
    - This register corresponds to bits 0-7 of the 32-bit `IRQ` register.
    - All 8 bits of this register are readable and writable.
- `IRQ1`: Interrupt Request Register - Byte 1
    - This register corresponds to bits 8-15 of the 32-bit `IRQ` register.
    - All 8 bits of this register are readable and writable.
- `IRQ2`: Interrupt Request Register - Byte 2
    - This register corresponds to bits 16-23 of the 32-bit `IRQ` register.
    - All 8 bits of this register are readable and writable.
- `IRQ3`: Interrupt Request Register - Byte 3
    - This register corresponds to bits 24-31 of the 32-bit `IRQ` register.
    - All 8 bits of this register are readable and writable.
- `SPD`: Speed Control Register
    - Bit 0: Speed Switch Armed Flag
        - If this bit is set, the CPU will perform a speed switch (toggle
            between normal speed and double speed) next time the CPU executes
            a `STOP` instruction. The CPU will wait 2,050 M-cycles during this
            process. See the **Instruction Timing** section for more on M-cycles.
    - Bit 1: Switch In Progress Flag (*Read-Only*)
        - If this bit is set, then the CPU is currently in the process of a speed
            switch.
    - Bit 7: Current Speed Flag (*Read-Only*)
        - If this bit is set, the CPU is currently operating in double speed mode.
        - If this bit is clear, the CPU is currently operating in normal speed mode.
    - Bits 2-6: Unused, always read/write as `1`.

Other virtual machine hardware components may define their own hardware registers
which can be memory-mapped for access by the CPU, as well.

## Instructions

The G10 CPU features a rich, fixed-length instruction set, designed to provide a
wide range of operations while maintaining simplicity and ease of use. Each
instruction is 16 bits (2 bytes) long, allowing for a compact representation of
operations. The instruction set includes various categories of instructions,
such as data movement, arithmetic and logic operations, control flow, stack
manipulation, and special operations.

### Instruction Layout

An instruction in the G10 CPU is represented by a 16-bit big-endian operation 
code (henceforth, an "opcode"). The bits of the opcode are laid out as follows:

```
0bIIIIIIII XXXX YYYY
```

Where:
- `IIIIIIII` (bits 15-8) represents the 8-bit instruction identifier, which 
    specifies the operation to be performed.
- `XXXX` (bits 7-4) and `YYYY` (bits 3-0) are 4-bit fields representing up to
    two built-in arguments for the instruction. The meaning of these fields
    depends on the specific instruction being executed, and can represent
    registers, branching conditions, or other instruction-specific parameters.
    - It's important to note that an instruction's built-in arguments are
        separate from any immediate data that may be needed by the instruction,
        and immediately follow the instruction opcode in memory.

### Instruction Length

All instruction opcodes in the G10 CPU are fixed at 16 bits (2 bytes) in length
at minimum. However, some instructions may require additional immediate data
to be provided, which follows the opcode in memory. Instructions in the G10 CPU
can be 2 bytes (opcode only), 3 bytes (opcode + 1 byte immediate), 4 bytes
(opcode + 2 bytes immediate), or 6 bytes (opcode + 4 bytes immediate) in total
length, depending on the specific instruction and its requirements.

### Instruction Timing

An instruction's execution time can be measured in one of two ways: CPU clock
cycles (tick cycles, or "T-cycles"), or virtual machine clock cycles (machine
cycles, or "M-cycles"). The distinction between these two timing methods is as
as follows: One M-cycle consists of four T-cycles.

In the G10 CPU, T-cycles are quite often (in fact, just about always) consumed
in multiples of four, meaning that most instructions will take a whole number of
M-cycles to execute, with very little exception (in fact, at this point, there
are no exceptions to this rule). As such, instruction timing will be specified in
M-cycles throughout this document.

An M-cycle is consumed every time the CPU:
- Reads a byte from memory (including fetching instruction opcodes and immediate data)
- Writes a byte to memory (including during stack push/pop operations)
- Moves the `SP` register (during stack push/pop operations)
- Moves the `PC` register (during jumps, calls, returns, interrupts, and exceptions)
- Performs a lengthy arithmetic operation (such as a 16- or 32-bit addition or subtraction,
    or a multiplication or division operation)
- Performs a wait state (prior to servicing interrupts or handling exceptions)

Every time a T-cycle is consumed, the CPU's internal clock is advanced by one
tick, causing all virtual hardware components attached to the CPU's bus to tick
and perform their own operations as needed.

#### Dots

In addition to the aforementioned units of time measurements, the G10 CPU and its
virtual hardware also support another unit of time measurement, known as a "dot". 
A dot is equal to two T-cycles in normal-speed mode, and four T-cycles in
double-speed mode. Dots are primarily used for timing certain hardware operations
and for synchronizing with the CPU's clock, but they are not used for measuring
instruction execution time.

### Instruction Set

The G10 CPU's instruction set is organized into several categories, each
containing instructions that perform related functions. The categories include:

- **`0x0***`: CPU Control Instructions**
- **`0x1***`: 8-Bit Load / Store / Move Instructions**
- **`0x2***`: 16-Bit Load / Store / Move Instructions**
- **`0x3***`: 32-Bit Load / Store / Move Instructions + Stack Operations**
- **`0x4***`: Branching Instructions**
- **`0x5***`: 8-Bit Arithmetic Instructions**
- **`0x6***`: 16-Bit and 32-Bit Arithmetic Instructions**
- **`0x7***`: 8-Bit Bitwise and Logical Instructions**
- **`0x8***`: Bit Shift and Swap Instructions**
- **`0x9***`: Bit Rotate Instructions**
- **`0xA***`: Bit Test and Manipulation Instructions**
- **`0xB***` and Beyond: Auxillary and Reserved Instructions**

Each instruction within these categories is defined by its unique opcode and
specific operation. Detailed descriptions of each instruction, including its
function, operands, and timing, are provided in the subsequent sections of this
document.

The tables below outline the instructions in each category, with each column
therein representing the following information:

- **Opcode & Mnemonic**: The 16-bit opcode of the instruction, along with its
    mnemonic (human-readable name). This may include placeholders for built-in
    arguments (e.g., `X`, `Y`).
    - Certain instructions may also have aliases, which are alternative mnemonics
        that refer to the same opcode. These aliases will be listed in the
        **Aliases** subsection below the corresponding instruction table.
- **Length**: The total length of the instruction in bytes, including any
    immediate data.
- **Timing**: The execution time of the instruction in M-cycles. This may be
    specified as one or more fixed values, depending on the specific operation 
    being performed (such as in the case of branching instructions).
- **Flags**: The flags in the Flags Register (`FR`) that are affected by the
    instruction.
    - This will be listed in the following format: `ZNHCV`, where each letter
        corresponds to a specific flag:
        - `Z`: Zero Flag
        - `N`: Negative (Subtract) Flag
        - `H`: Half-Carry Flag
        - `C`: Carry Flag
        - `V`: Overflow Flag
    - How the flag is affected (if at all) will be indicated as follows:
        - `-`: Unchanged
        - `0`: Cleared (set to `0`)
        - `1`: Set (set to `1`)
        - `?`: Set or cleared based on the result of the operation. See the
            **Notes** subsection below the coresponding instruction table for
            further details.
    - If an instruction affects a flag other than the four listed above, those
        flags will be listed as follows: `F=S`, where `F` is the flag being affected,
        and `S` is how it is affected (using the same notation as above).
    - If the **Flags** column for a given instruction is left blank, it indicates
        that the instruction does not affect any flags.
    - If a given instruction table does not have a **Flags** column, it indicates
        that none of the instructions in that particular category affect any flags.
- **Description**: A brief description of the instruction's operation.

#### `0x0***`: CPU Control Instructions

The **CPU Control Instructions** are used to manage the overall state and
operation of the G10 CPU. These instructions allow for enabling and disabling
interrupts, as well as placing the CPU into low-power states.

| Opcode & Mnemonic         | Length    | Timing    | Flags             | Description                                                                                       |
|---------------------------|-----------|-----------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `0x0000 NOP`              | 2         | 2         |                   | Does Nothing.                                                                                     |
| `0x0100 STOP`             | 2         | 2         |                   | Puts the CPU into the `STOP` state, halting all operations until the `T` flag is cleared.         |
| `0x0200 HALT`             | 2         | 2         |                   | Puts the CPU into the `HALT` state, halting instruction execution pending an interrupt.           |
| `0x0300 DI`               | 2         | 2         |                   | Disables interrupts by clearing the `IME` flag.                                                   |
| `0x0400 EI`               | 2         | 2         |                   | Enables interrupts after the next instruction by setting the `IMP` flag.                          |
| `0x0500 EII`              | 2         | 2         |                   | Enables interrupts immediately by setting the `IME` flag.                                         |
| `0x0600 DAA`              | 2         | 2         | `?-0?-`           | Decimal-adjusts byte accumulator `L0` for BCD (Binary-Coded Decimal) representation.              |
| `0x0700 SCF`              | 2         | 2         | `-001-`           | Sets the Carry flag.                                                                              |
| `0x0800 CCF`              | 2         | 2         | `-00?-`           | Complements (toggles) the Carry flag.                                                             |
| `0x0900 CLV`              | 2         | 2         | `----0`           | Clears the Overflow flag.                                                                         |
| `0x0A00 SEV`              | 2         | 2         | `----1`           | Sets the Overflow flag.                                                                           |
| `0x0BXY REX XY`           | 2         | 2         |                   | Raises an exception with code `XY`, setting the pending exception code `PEC` to that value.       |
| `0x0CX0 LEC LX`           | 2         | 2         |                   | Loads the exception code `EC` register into register `LX`                                         |

##### Notes

- `0x0600 DAA`:
    - `Z`: Set if the result in `L0` is zero; cleared otherwise.
    - `C`: Set if already set, or if the upper nibble was decimal-adjusted; cleared otherwise.
- `0x0800 CCF`:
    - The Carry flag is toggled: set if it was clear, and cleared if it was set.

##### Aliases

- `TCF` is an alias for `0x0800 CCF`.

#### `0x1***`: 8-Bit Load / Store / Move Instructions

The **8-Bit Load / Store / Move Instructions** are used to transfer 8-bit data
between registers and memory. These instructions facilitate data movement within
the CPU and between the CPU and memory.

| Opcode & Mnemonic         | Length    | Timing    | Description                                                                                       |
|---------------------------|-----------|-----------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `0x10X0 LD LX, IMM8`      | 3         | 3         | Loads 8-bit immediate `IMM8` into register `LX`.                                                  |
| `0x11X0 LD LX, [IMM32]`   | 6         | 7         | Loads 8-bit value from address `IMM32` into register `LX`.                                        |
| `0x12XY LD LX, [DY]`      | 2         | 3         | Loads 8-bit value from address in register `DY` into register `LX`.                               |
| `0x13X0 LDQ LX, [IMM16]`  | 4         | 5         | Loads 8-bit value from address `$FFFF0000 + ADDR16` into register `LX`.                           |
| `0x14XY LDQ LX, [WY]`     | 2         | 3         | Loads 8-bit value from address `$FFFF0000 + WY` into register `LX`.                               |
| `0x15X0 LDP LX, [IMM8]`   | 3         | 4         | Loads 8-bit value from address `$FFFFFF00 + ADDR8` into register `LX`.                            |
| `0x16XY LDP LX, [LY]`     | 2         | 3         | Loads 8-bit value from address `$FFFFFF00 + LY` into register `LX`.                               |
| `0x170Y ST [IMM32], LY`   | 6         | 7         | Stores 8-bit value from register `LY` into address `IMM32`.                                       |
| `0x18XY ST [DX], LY`      | 2         | 3         | Stores 8-bit value from register `LY` into address in register `DX`.                              |
| `0x190Y STQ [IMM16], LY`  | 4         | 5         | Stores 8-bit value from register `LY` into address `$FFFF0000 + ADDR16`.                          |
| `0x1AXY STQ [WX], LY`     | 2         | 3         | Stores 8-bit value from register `LY` into address `$FFFF0000 + WX`.                              |
| `0x1B0Y STP [IMM8], LY`   | 3         | 4         | Stores 8-bit value from register `LY` into address `$FFFFFF00 + ADDR8`.                           |
| `0x1CXY STP [LX], LY`     | 2         | 3         | Stores 8-bit value from register `LY` into address `$FFFFFF00 + LX`.                              |
| `0x1DXY MV LX, LY`        | 2         | 2         | Moves 8-bit value from register `LY` to register `LX`.                                            |
| `0x1EXY MV HX, LY`        | 2         | 2         | Moves 8-bit value from register `LY` to register `HX`.                                            |
| `0x1FXY MV LX, HY`        | 2         | 2         | Moves 8-bit value from register `HY` to register `LX`.                                            |

#### `0x2***`: 16-Bit Load / Store / Move Instructions

The **16-Bit Load / Store / Move Instructions** are used to transfer 16-bit data
between registers and memory. These instructions facilitate data movement within
the CPU and between the CPU and memory.

| Opcode & Mnemonic         | Length    | Timing    | Description                                                                                       |
|---------------------------|-----------|-----------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `0x20X0 LD WX, IMM16`     | 4         | 4         | Loads 16-bit immediate `IMM16` into register `WX`.                                                |
| `0x21X0 LD WX, [IMM32]`   | 6         | 8         | Loads 16-bit value from address `IMM32` into register `WX`.                                       |
| `0x22XY LD WX, [DY]`      | 2         | 4         | Loads 16-bit value from address in register `DY` into register `WX`.                              |
| `0x23X0 LDQ WX, [IMM16]`  | 4         | 6         | Loads 16-bit value from address `$FFFF0000 + ADDR16` into register `WX`.                          |
| `0x24XY LDQ WX, [WY]`     | 2         | 4         | Loads 16-bit value from address `$FFFF0000 + WY` into register `WX`.                              |
| `0x270Y ST [IMM32], WY`   | 6         | 8         | Stores 16-bit value from register `WY` into address `IMM32`.                                      |
| `0x28XY ST [DX], WY`      | 2         | 4         | Stores 16-bit value from register `WY` into address in register `DX`.                             |
| `0x290Y STQ [IMM16], WY`  | 4         | 6         | Stores 16-bit value from register `WY` into address `$FFFF0000 + ADDR16`.                         |
| `0x2AXY STQ [WX], WY`     | 2         | 4         | Stores 16-bit value from register `WY` into address `$FFFF0000 + WX`.                             |
| `0x2DXY MV WX, WY`        | 2         | 2         | Moves 16-bit value from register `WY` to register `WX`.                                           |
| `0x2EXY MWH DX, WY`       | 2         | 2         | Moves 16-bit value from register `WY` to upper word of register `DX`.                             |
| `0x2FXY MWL WX, DY`       | 2         | 2         | Moves upper word of register `DY` to register `WX`.                                               |

#### `0x3***`: 32-Bit Load / Store / Move Instructions + Stack Operations

The **32-Bit Load / Store / Move Instructions** are used to transfer 32-bit data
between registers and memory. These instructions facilitate data movement within
the CPU and between the CPU and memory. This category also includes stack
manipulation instructions for pushing and popping data to and from the stack.

| Opcode & Mnemonic         | Length    | Timing    | Description                                                                                       |
|---------------------------|-----------|-----------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `0x30X0 LD DX, IMM32`     | 6         | 6         | Loads 32-bit immediate `IMM32` into register `DX`.                                                |
| `0x31X0 LD DX, [IMM32]`   | 6         | 10        | Loads 32-bit value from address `IMM32` into register `DX`.                                       |
| `0x32XY LD DX, [DY]`      | 2         | 6         | Loads 32-bit value from address in register `DY` into register `DX`.                              |
| `0x33X0 LDQ DX, [IMM16]`  | 4         | 8         | Loads 32-bit value from address `0xFFFF0000 + ADDR16` into register `DX`.                         |
| `0x34XY LDQ DX, [WY]`     | 2         | 6         | Loads 32-bit value from address `0xFFFF0000 + WY` into register `DX`.                             |
| `0x3500 LSP IMM32`        | 6         | 7         | Loads 32-bit immediate `IMM32` into the Stack Pointer (`SP`).                                     |
| `0x36X0 POP DX`           | 2         | 7         | Pops 32-bit value from the stack into register `DX`.                                              |
| `0x370Y ST [IMM32], DY`   | 6         | 10        | Stores 32-bit value from register `DY` into address `IMM32`.                                      |
| `0x38XY ST [DX], DY`      | 2         | 6         | Stores 32-bit value from register `DY` into address in register `DX`.                             |
| `0x390Y STQ [IMM16], DY`  | 4         | 8         | Stores 32-bit value from register `DY` into address `0xFFFF0000 + ADDR16`.                        |
| `0x3AXY STQ [WX], DY`     | 2         | 6         | Stores 32-bit value from register `DY` into address `0xFFFF0000 + WX`.                            |
| `0x3B00 SSP [IMM32]`      | 6         | 10        | Stores the value of the Stack Pointer (`SP`) into address `IMM32`.                                |
| `0x3C0Y PUSH DY`          | 2         | 7         | Pushes 32-bit value from register `DY` onto the stack.                                            |
| `0x3DXY MV DX, DY`        | 2         | 2         | Moves 32-bit value from register `DY` to register `DX`.                                           |
| `0x3EX0 SPO DX`           | 2         | 2         | Moves the value of the Stack Pointer (`SP`) into register `DX`.                                   |
| `0x3F0Y SPI DY`           | 2         | 3         | Moves the value of register `DY` into the Stack Pointer (`SP`).                                   |

#### `0x4***`: Branching Instructions

The **Branching Instructions** are used to control the flow of execution in a
program. These instructions allow for conditional and unconditional jumps,
calls, and returns, enabling the implementation of loops, subroutines, and
conditional logic.

Most of these instructions expect an execution condition, specified by the
`X` built-in argument. The conditions are as follows:

- **`0x0: NC`: No Condition**
    - The instruction is always executed, regardless of the state of any flags.
- **`0x1: ZS`: Zero Set**
    - The instruction is executed if the Zero flag (`Z`) is set.
- **`0x2: ZC`: Zero Clear**
    - The instruction is executed if the Zero flag (`Z`) is clear.
- **`0x3: CS`: Carry Set**
    - The instruction is executed if the Carry flag (`C`) is set.
- **`0x4: CC`: Carry Clear**
    - The instruction is executed if the Carry flag (`C`) is clear.
- **`0x5: VS`: Overflow Set**
    - The instruction is executed if the Overflow flag (`V`) is set.
- **`0x6: VC`: Overflow Clear**
    - The instruction is executed if the Overflow flag (`V`) is clear.

This category also includes instructions for moving data between the Flags
Register (`FR`) and the general-purpose registers.

| Opcode & Mnemonic         | Length    | Timing    | Description                                                                                       |
|---------------------------|-----------|-----------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `0x40X0 JMP X, IMM32`     | 6         | 6 / 7     | Jumps to immediate address `IMM32` if condition `X` is met.                                       |
| `0x41XY JMP X, DY`        | 2         | 2 / 3     | Jumps to address in register `DY` if condition `X` is met.                                        |
| `0x42X0 JPB X, SIMM16`    | 4         | 4 / 5     | Moves `PC` by signed immediate `SIMM16` if condition `X` is met.                                  |
| `0x43X0 CALL X, IMM32`    | 6         | 6 / 12    | Calls subroutine at immediate address `IMM32` if condition `X` is met.                            |
| `0x44XY INT XY`           | 2         | 8         | Explicitly calls interrupt service routine `XY`.                                                  |
| `0x45X0 RET X`            | 2         | 3 / 9 / 8 | Returns from subroutine if condition `X` is met.                                                  |
| `0x4600 RETI`             | 2         | 8         | Returns from interrupt or exception handler, re-enabling interrupts.                              |
| `0x4E0Y MFI LY`           | 2         | 2         | Moves the current value of register `LY` into the Flags Register (`FR`).                          |
| `0x4FX0 MFO LX`           | 2         | 2         | Moves the current Flags Register (`FR`) value into register `LX`.                                 |

##### Notes

- `0x40X0 JMP X, IMM32`:
    - Timing is `6 M-cycles` if the jump is not taken; `7 M-cycles` if the jump is taken.
- `0x41XY JMP X, DY`:
    - Timing is `2 M-cycles` if the jump is not taken; `3 M-cycles` if the jump is taken.
- `0x42X0 JPB X, SIMM16`:
    - Timing is `4 M-cycles` if the jump is not taken; `5 M-cycles` if the jump is taken.
- `0x43X0 CALL X, IMM32`:
    - Timing is `6 M-cycles` if the call is not taken; `12 M-cycles` if the call is taken.
- `0x44XY INT XY`:
    - `XY` must be between `0x00` and `0x1F` (0 to 31). An attempt to call an
        invalid interrupt vector will result in an `INVALID_ARGUMENT` exception.
- `0x45X0 RET X`:
    - Timing is `3 M-cycles` if the return is conditional and not taken;
        `9 M-cycles` if the return is conditional and taken;
        `8 M-cycles` if the return is unconditional.

##### Aliases

- `JMP`, `JPB`, `CALL` and `RET` instructions invoked with no execution condition
    explicitly specified (i.e., using the mnemonic without the `X` built-in argument,
    like `JMP IMM32`, `JPB SIMM16`, `CALL IMM32`, or `RET`) are aliases for the
    corresponding instructions with the `NC` (No Condition) execution condition.
    (e.g. `JMP IMM32` is the same as `JMP NC, IMM32`, `RET` is the same as `RET NC`).
- `JP` is an alias for all of the `JMP` instructions.
- `JR` is an alias for all of the `JPB` instructions.

#### `0x5***`: 8-Bit Arithmetic Instructions

The **8-Bit Arithmetic Instructions** are used to perform arithmetic operations
on 8-bit data, using the accumulator register `L0` as one of the operands. These
instructions support addition and subtraction, with optional carry/borrow
handling. Increment and decrement operations are also provided.

| Opcode & Mnemonic         | Length    | Timing    | Flags             | Description                                                                                       |
|---------------------------|-----------|-----------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `0x5000 ADD L0, IMM8`     | 3         | 3         | `?0???`           | Adds immediate `IMM8` to accumulator `L0`.                                                        |
| `0x510Y ADD L0, LY`       | 2         | 2         | `?0???`           | Adds register `LY` to accumulator `L0`.                                                           |
| `0x520Y ADD L0, [DY]`     | 2         | 3         | `?0???`           | Adds value from address in register `DY` to accumulator `L0`.                                     |
| `0x5300 ADC L0, IMM8`     | 3         | 3         | `?0???`           | Adds immediate `IMM8` and Carry flag to accumulator `L0`.                                         |
| `0x540Y ADC L0, LY`       | 2         | 2         | `?0???`           | Adds register `LY` and Carry flag to accumulator `L0`.                                            |
| `0x550Y ADC L0, [DY]`     | 2         | 3         | `?0???`           | Adds value from address in register `DY` and Carry flag to accumulator `L0`.                      |
| `0x5600 SUB L0, IMM8`     | 3         | 3         | `?1???`           | Subtracts immediate `IMM8` from accumulator `L0`.                                                 |
| `0x570Y SUB L0, LY`       | 2         | 2         | `?1???`           | Subtracts register `LY` from accumulator `L0`.                                                    |
| `0x580Y SUB L0, [DY]`     | 2         | 3         | `?1???`           | Subtracts value from address in register `DY` from accumulator `L0`.                              |
| `0x5900 SBC L0, IMM8`     | 3         | 3         | `?1???`           | Subtracts immediate `IMM8` and Carry flag from accumulator `L0`.                                  |
| `0x5A0Y SBC L0, LY`       | 2         | 2         | `?1???`           | Subtracts register `LY` and Carry flag from accumulator `L0`.                                     |
| `0x5B0Y SBC L0, [DY]`     | 2         | 3         | `?1???`           | Subtracts value from address in register `DY` and Carry flag from accumulator `L0`.               |
| `0x5CX0 INC LX`           | 2         | 2         | `?0?-?`           | Increments register `LX` by 1.                                                                    |
| `0x5DX0 INC [DX]`         | 2         | 4         | `?0?-?`           | Increments value at address in register `DX` by 1.                                                |
| `0x5EX0 DEC LX`           | 2         | 2         | `?1?-?`           | Decrements register `LX` by 1.                                                                    |
| `0x5FX0 DEC [DX]`         | 2         | 4         | `?1?-?`           | Decrements value at address in register `DX` by 1.                                                |

##### Notes

- For all addition instructions (`ADD`, `ADC`):
    - `Z`: Set if the result is zero; cleared otherwise.
    - `N`: Cleared.
    - `H`: Set if there was a carry from bit 3 to bit 4; cleared otherwise.
    - `C`: Set if there was a carry from bit 7; cleared otherwise.
    - `V`: Set if signed overflow occurred; cleared otherwise.
- For all subtraction instructions (`SUB`, `SBC`):
    - `Z`: Set if the result is zero; cleared otherwise.
    - `N`: Set.
    - `H`: Set if there was a borrow from bit 4 to bit 3; cleared otherwise.
    - `C`: Set if there was a borrow from bit 8; cleared otherwise.
    - `V`: Set if signed overflow occurred; cleared otherwise.
- For all increment instructions (`INC`):
    - `Z`: Set if the result is zero; cleared otherwise.
    - `N`: Cleared.
    - `H`: Set if there was a carry from bit 3 to bit 4; cleared otherwise.
    - `C`: Unchanged.
    - `V`: Set if signed overflow occurred; cleared otherwise.
- For all decrement instructions (`DEC`):
    - `Z`: Set if the result is zero; cleared otherwise.
    - `N`: Set.
    - `H`: Set if there was a borrow from bit 4 to bit 3; cleared otherwise.
    - `C`: Unchanged.
    - `V`: Set if signed overflow occurred; cleared otherwise.

#### `0x6***`: 16-Bit and 32-Bit Arithmetic Instructions

The **16-Bit and 32-Bit Arithmetic Instructions** are used to perform arithmetic
operations on 16-bit and 32-bit data. These instructions support addition and
subtraction, with optional carry/borrow handling. Increment and decrement
operations are also provided.

| Opcode & Mnemonic         | Length    | Timing    | Flags             | Description                                                                                       |
|---------------------------|-----------|-----------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `0x6000 ADD W0, IMM16`    | 4         | 5         | `?0???`           | Adds immediate `IMM16` to register `W0`.                                                          |
| `0x610Y ADD W0, WY`       | 2         | 3         | `?0???`           | Adds register `WY` to register `W0`.                                                              |
| `0x6200 ADD D0, IMM32`    | 6         | 9         | `?0???`           | Adds immediate `IMM32` to register `D0`.                                                          |
| `0x630Y ADD D0, DY`       | 2         | 5         | `?0???`           | Adds register `DY` to register `D0`.                                                              |
| `0x6400 SUB W0, IMM16`    | 4         | 5         | `?1???`           | Subtracts immediate `IMM16` from register `W0`.                                                   |
| `0x650Y SUB W0, WY`       | 2         | 3         | `?1???`           | Subtracts register `WY` from register `W0`.                                                       |
| `0x6600 SUB D0, IMM32`    | 6         | 9         | `?1???`           | Subtracts immediate `IMM32` from register `D0`.                                                   |
| `0x670Y SUB D0, DY`       | 2         | 5         | `?1???`           | Subtracts register `DY` from register `D0`.                                                       |
| `0x6CX0 INC WX`           | 2         | 3         | `?0?--`           | Increments register `WX` by 1.                                                                    |
| `0x6DX0 INC DX`           | 2         | 5         | `?0?--`           | Increments register `DX` by 1.                                                                    |
| `0x6EX0 DEC WX`           | 2         | 3         | `?1?--`           | Decrements register `WX` by 1.                                                                    |
| `0x6FX0 DEC DX`           | 2         | 5         | `?1?--`           | Decrements register `DX` by 1.                                                                    |

##### Notes

- For all addition instructions (`ADD`):
    - `Z`: Set if the result is zero; cleared otherwise.
    - `N`: Cleared.
    - `H`: Set if there was a carry from bit 11 to bit 12 (for 16-bit) or bit 27 to bit 28 (for 32-bit); cleared otherwise.
    - `C`: Set if there was a carry from bit 15 (for 16-bit) or bit 31 (for 32-bit); cleared otherwise.
    - `V`: Set if signed overflow occurred; cleared otherwise.
- For all subtraction instructions (`SUB`):
    - `Z`: Set if the result is zero; cleared otherwise.
    - `N`: Set.
    - `H`: Set if there was a borrow from bit 12 to bit 11 (for 16-bit) or bit 28 to bit 27 (for 32-bit); cleared otherwise.
    - `C`: Set if there was a borrow from bit 16 (for 16-bit) or bit 32 (for 32-bit); cleared otherwise.
    - `V`: Set if signed overflow occurred; cleared otherwise.
- For all increment instructions (`INC`):
    - `Z`: Set if the result is zero; cleared otherwise.
    - `N`: Cleared.
    - `H`: Set if there was a carry from bit 11 to bit 12 (for 16-bit) or bit 27 to bit 28 (for 32-bit); cleared otherwise.
    - `C`: Unchanged.
- For all decrement instructions (`DEC`):
    - `Z`: Set if the result is zero; cleared otherwise.
    - `N`: Set.
    - `H`: Set if there was a borrow from bit 12 to bit 11 (for 16-bit) or bit 28 to bit 27 (for 32-bit); cleared otherwise.
    - `C`: Unchanged.

#### `0x7***`: 8-Bit Bitwise and Logical Instructions

The **8-Bit Bitwise and Logical Instructions** are used to perform bitwise and
logical operations on 8-bit data, using the accumulator register `L0` as one of
the operands. These instructions support AND, OR, XOR and NOT operations, as well
as comparison operations.

| Opcode & Mnemonic         | Length    | Timing    | Flags             | Description                                                                                       |
|---------------------------|-----------|-----------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `0x7000 AND L0, IMM8`     | 3         | 3         | `?0100`           | Performs bitwise AND between immediate `IMM8` and accumulator `L0`.                               |
| `0x710Y AND L0, LY`       | 2         | 2         | `?0100`           | Performs bitwise AND between register `LY` and accumulator `L0`.                                  |
| `0x720Y AND L0, [DY]`     | 2         | 3         | `?0100`           | Performs bitwise AND between value from address in register `DY` and accumulator `L0`.            |
| `0x7300 OR L0, IMM8`      | 3         | 3         | `?0000`           | Performs bitwise OR between immediate `IMM8` and accumulator `L0`.                                |
| `0x740Y OR L0, LY`        | 2         | 2         | `?0000`           | Performs bitwise OR between register `LY` and accumulator `L0`.                                   |
| `0x750Y OR L0, [DY]`      | 2         | 3         | `?0000`           | Performs bitwise OR between value from address in register `DY` and accumulator `L0`.             |
| `0x7600 XOR L0, IMM8`     | 3         | 3         | `?0000`           | Performs bitwise XOR between immediate `IMM8` and accumulator `L0`.                               |
| `0x770Y XOR L0, LY`       | 2         | 2         | `?0000`           | Performs bitwise XOR between register `LY` and accumulator `L0`.                                  |
| `0x780Y XOR L0, [DY]`     | 2         | 3         | `?0000`           | Performs bitwise XOR between value from address in register `DY` and accumulator `L0`.            |
| `0x79X0 NOT LX`           | 2         | 2         | `-11-0`           | Performs bitwise NOT (complement) on register `LX`.                                               |
| `0x7AX0 NOT [DX]`         | 2         | 4         | `-11-0`           | Performs bitwise NOT (complement) on value at address in register `DX`.                           |
| `0x7D00 CMP L0, IMM8`     | 3         | 3         | `?1???`           | Compares immediate `IMM8` with accumulator `L0`.                                                  |
| `0x7E0Y CMP L0, LY`       | 2         | 2         | `?1???`           | Compares register `LY` with accumulator `L0`.                                                     |
| `0x7F0Y CMP L0, [DY]`     | 2         | 3         | `?1???`           | Compares value from address in register `DY` with accumulator `L0`.                               |

##### Notes

- For all `AND` instructions:
    - `Z`: Set if the result is zero; cleared otherwise.
    - `N`: Cleared.
    - `H`: Set.
    - `C`: Cleared.
- For all `OR` and `XOR` instructions:
    - `Z`: Set if the result is zero; cleared otherwise.
    - `N`: Cleared.
    - `H`: Cleared.
    - `C`: Cleared.
- For all `NOT` instructions:
    - `Z`: Unchanged.
    - `N`: Set.
    - `H`: Set.
    - `C`: Unchanged.
- For all `CMP` instructions:
    - `Z`: Set if the result of the subtraction is zero (indicating the operand values are equal); cleared otherwise.
    - `N`: Set.
    - `H`: Set if there was a borrow from bit 4 to bit 3 (indicating that operand 1's lower three nibbles were less than operand 2's); cleared otherwise.
    - `C`: Set if there was a borrow from bit 8 (indicating that operand 1 was less than operand 2); cleared otherwise.
    - `V`: Set if signed overflow occurred; cleared otherwise.

##### Aliases

- `CPL` is an alias for `0x7900 NOT L0`.
- `CP` is an alias for all of the `CMP` instructions.

#### `0x8***`: Bit Shift and Swap Instructions

The **Bit Shift and Swap Instructions** are used to perform bitwise shift
operations on 8-bit data in registers. These instructions support arithmetic and
logical shifts. The swap operation exchanges the upper and lower nibbles of a byte.

| Opcode & Mnemonic         | Length    | Timing    | Flags             | Description                                                                                       |
|---------------------------|-----------|-----------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `0x80X0 SLA LX`           | 2         | 2         | `?00?-`           | Shifts bits in register `LX` left arithmetically.                                                 |
| `0x81X0 SLA [DX]`         | 2         | 4         | `?00?-`           | Shifts bits at address in register `DX` left arithmetically.                                      |
| `0x82X0 SRA LX`           | 2         | 2         | `?00?-`           | Shifts bits in register `LX` right arithmetically.                                                |
| `0x83X0 SRA [DX]`         | 2         | 4         | `?00?-`           | Shifts bits at address in register `DX` right arithmetically.                                     |
| `0x84X0 SRL LX`           | 2         | 2         | `?00?-`           | Shifts bits in register `LX` right logically.                                                     |
| `0x85X0 SRL [DX]`         | 2         | 4         | `?00?-`           | Shifts bits at address in register `DX` right logically.                                          |
| `0x86X0 SWAP LX`          | 2         | 2         | `?000-`           | Swaps upper and lower nibbles in register `LX`.                                                   |
| `0x87X0 SWAP [DX]`        | 2         | 4         | `?000-`           | Swaps upper and lower nibbles at address in register `DX`.                                        |
| `0x88X0 SWAP WX`          | 2         | 3         | `?000-`           | Swaps upper and lower bytes in register `WX`.                                                     |
| `0x89X0 SWAP DX`          | 2         | 5         | `?000-`           | Swaps upper and lower words in register `DX`.                                                     |

##### Notes

- For the `SLA` instructions:
    - `Z`: Set if the result is zero; cleared otherwise.
    - `N`: Cleared.
    - `H`: Cleared.
    - `C`: Changed to the value of the bit shifted out (bit 7).
    - Bit 0 is set to `0` after the shift.
- For the `SRA` instructions:
    - `Z`: Set if the result is zero; cleared otherwise.
    - `N`: Cleared.
    - `H`: Cleared.
    - `C`: Changed to the value of the bit shifted out (bit 0).
    - Bit 7 retains its original value (sign bit) after the shift.
- For the `SRL` instructions:
    - `Z`: Set if the result is zero; cleared otherwise.
    - `N`: Cleared.
    - `H`: Cleared.
    - `C`: Changed to the value of the bit shifted out (bit 0).
    - Bit 7 is set to `0` after the shift.
- For the `SWAP` instructions:
    - `Z`: Set if the result is zero; cleared otherwise.
    - `N`: Cleared.
    - `H`: Cleared.
    - `C`: Cleared.

#### `0x9***`: Bit Rotate Instructions

The **Bit Rotate Instructions** are used to perform bitwise rotate operations on 
8-bit data in registers. These instructions support circular and non-circular rotates.

| Opcode & Mnemonic         | Length    | Timing    | Flags             | Description                                                                                       |
|---------------------------|-----------|-----------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `0x9000 RLA`              | 2         | 2         | `000?-`           | Rotates bits in accumulator `L0` left through Carry.                                              |
| `0x91X0 RL LX`            | 2         | 2         | `?00?-`           | Rotates bits in register `LX` left through Carry.                                                 |
| `0x92X0 RL [DX]`          | 2         | 4         | `?00?-`           | Rotates bits at address in register `DX` left through Carry.                                      |      
| `0x9300 RLCA`             | 2         | 2         | `000?-`           | Rotates bits in accumulator `L0` left.                                                            |
| `0x94X0 RLC LX`           | 2         | 2         | `?00?-`           | Rotates bits in register `LX` left.                                                               |
| `0x95X0 RLC [DX]`         | 2         | 4         | `?00?-`           | Rotates bits at address in register `DX` left.                                                    |
| `0x9600 RRA`              | 2         | 2         | `000?-`           | Rotates bits in accumulator `L0` right through Carry.                                             |
| `0x97X0 RR LX`            | 2         | 2         | `?00?-`           | Rotates bits in register `LX` right through Carry.                                                |
| `0x98X0 RR [DX]`          | 2         | 4         | `?00?-`           | Rotates bits at address in register `DX` right through Carry.                                     |
| `0x9900 RRCA`             | 2         | 2         | `000?-`           | Rotates bits in accumulator `L0` right.                                                           |
| `0x9AX0 RRC LX`           | 2         | 2         | `?00?-`           | Rotates bits in register `LX` right.                                                              |
| `0x9BX0 RRC [DX]`         | 2         | 4         | `?00?-`           | Rotates bits at address in register `DX` right.                                                   |

##### Notes

- For the `RLA` instruction:
    - `Z`: Cleared.
    - `N`: Cleared.
    - `H`: Cleared.
    - `C`: Changed to the value of bit 7 before the rotate.
    - Bit 0 is set to the previous value of the Carry flag after the rotate.
- For the `RL` instructions:
    - `Z`: Set if the result is zero; cleared otherwise.
    - `N`: Cleared.
    - `H`: Cleared.
    - `C`: Changed to the value of bit 7 before the rotate.
    - Bit 0 is set to the previous value of the Carry flag after the rotate.
- For the `RLCA` instruction:
    - `Z`: Cleared.
    - `N`: Cleared.
    - `H`: Cleared.
    - `C`: Changed to the value of bit 7 before the rotate.
    - Bit 0 is set to the previous value of bit 7 after the rotate.
- For the `RLC` instructions:
    - `Z`: Set if the result is zero; cleared otherwise.
    - `N`: Cleared.
    - `H`: Cleared.
    - `C`: Changed to the value of bit 7 before the rotate.
    - Bit 0 is set to the previous value of bit 7 after the rotate.
- For the `RRA` instruction:
    - `Z`: Cleared.
    - `N`: Cleared.
    - `H`: Cleared.
    - `C`: Changed to the value of bit 0 before the rotate.
    - Bit 7 is set to the previous value of the Carry flag after the rotate.
- For the `RR` instructions:
    - `Z`: Set if the result is zero; cleared otherwise.
    - `N`: Cleared.
    - `H`: Cleared.
    - `C`: Changed to the value of bit 0 before the rotate.
    - Bit 7 is set to the previous value of the Carry flag after the rotate.
- For the `RRCA` instruction:
    - `Z`: Cleared.
    - `N`: Cleared.
    - `H`: Cleared.
    - `C`: Changed to the value of bit 0 before the rotate.
    - Bit 7 is set to the previous value of bit 0 after the rotate. 

#### `0xA***`: Bit Test and Manipulation Instructions

The **Bit Test and Manipulation Instructions** are used to test, set, clear,
and toggle individual bits in 8-bit registers or memory locations. These
instructions facilitate bit-level operations, which are often used in low-level
programming and hardware control.

| Opcode & Mnemonic         | Length    | Timing    | Flags             | Description                                                                                       |
|---------------------------|-----------|-----------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `0xA0XY BIT Y, LX`        | 2         | 2         | `?01--`           | Tests bit `Y` in register `LX`.                                                                   |
| `0xA1XY BIT Y, [DX]`      | 2         | 3         | `?01--`           | Tests bit `Y` at address in register `DX`.                                                        |
| `0xA2XY SET Y, LX`        | 2         | 2         | `-----`           | Sets bit `Y` in register `LX`.                                                                    |
| `0xA3XY SET Y, [DX]`      | 2         | 4         | `-----`           | Sets bit `Y` at address in register `DX`.                                                         |
| `0xA4XY RES Y, LX`        | 2         | 2         | `-----`           | Resets (clears) bit `Y` in register `LX`.                                                         |
| `0xA5XY RES Y, [DX]`      | 2         | 4         | `-----`           | Resets (clears) bit `Y` at address in register `DX`.                                              |
| `0xA6XY TOG Y, LX`        | 2         | 2         | `-----`           | Toggles bit `Y` in register `LX`.                                                                 |
| `0xA7XY TOG Y, [DX]`      | 2         | 4         | `-----`           | Toggles bit `Y` at address in register `DX`.                                                      |

##### Notes

- For all `BIT` instructions:
    - `Z`: Set if the tested bit is `0`; cleared if the tested bit is `1`.
    - `N`: Cleared.
    - `H`: Set.
    - `C`: Unchanged.
- For all `SET`, `RES`, and `TOG` instructions:
    - No flags are affected.

#### `0x****`: Auxillary Instructions

Instruction opcodes starting from `0xB0**` are reserved for auxillary operations,
which may be any kind of operations which either do not fit into the other
categories, not commonly used, or belong to a category in which all opcodes have
already been assigned to other instructions.

| Opcode & Mnemonic         | Length    | Timing    | Flags             | Description                                                                                       |
|---------------------------|-----------|-----------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `0xB0XY LDI LX, [DY]`     | 2         | 3         | `-----`           | Loads value from address in register `DY` into register `LX`, then increments `DY` by 1.          |
| `0xB1XY LDD LX, [DY]`     | 2         | 3         | `-----`           | Loads value from address in register `DY` into register `LX`, then decrements `DY` by 1.          |
| `0xB2XY STI [DX], LY`     | 2         | 3         | `-----`           | Stores value from register `LY` into address in register `DX`, then increments `DX` by 1.         |
| `0xB3XY STD [DX], LY`     | 2         | 3         | `-----`           | Stores value from register `LY` into address in register `DX`, then decrements `DX` by 1.         |
| `0xB400 ASP SIMM8`        | 3         | 4         | `00???`           | Adds signed immediate `SIMM8` to Stack Pointer (`SP`).                                            |
| `0xB5X0 ST [DX], IMM8`    | 3         | 4         | `-----`           | Stores immediate `IMM8` into the address pointed to by register `DX`.                             |
| `0xB6X0 LASP DX, SIMM8`   | 3         | 4         | `00???`           | Loads Stack Pointer (`SP`), adjusted by signed immediate `SIMM8`, into register `DX`.             |
| `0xB700 ISP`              | 2         | 3         | `-----`           | Increments the Stack Pointer (`SP`) by 1.                                                         |
| `0xB800 DSP`              | 2         | 3         | `-----`           | Decrements the Stack Pointer (`SP`) by 1.                                                         |
| `0xB9X0 ASR DX`           | 2         | 5         | `?0???`           | Adds the value of the Stack Pointer (`SP`) to register `DX`.                                      |

##### Notes

- For `0xB400 ASP SIMM8` and `0xB6X0 LASP DX, SIMM8`:
    - `Z`: Clear
    - `N`: Clear
    - `H`: Set if there was a carry from bit 3 to bit 4; cleared otherwise.
    - `C`: Set if there was a carry from bit 7; cleared otherwise.
    - `V`: Set if signed overflow occurred; cleared otherwise.
- For `0xB5X0 ST [DX], IMM8`:
    - No flags are affected.
- For `0xB700 ISP` and `0xB800 DSP`:
    - No flags are affected.
- For `0xB9X0 ASR DX`:
    - `Z`: Set if the result is zero; cleared otherwise.
    - `N`: Cleared.
    - `H`: Set if there was a carry from bit 27 to bit 28; cleared otherwise.
    - `C`: Set if there was a carry from bit 31; cleared otherwise.
    - `V`: Set if signed overflow occurred; cleared otherwise.
